Restructure e2 (#261)
MeteoSwiss/opendata: docs/e-forecast-data/e2-e3-numerical-weather-forecasting-model.mdx

The documentation covers the following topics:
- [Getting started quickly](#getting-started-quickly)
    - [Example notebooks: From retrieval to visualization](#example-notebooks-from-retrieval-to-visualization)
- [Available data](#available-data)
    - [Models' specifications](#models-specifications)
    - [Available parameters](#available-parameters)
    - [24h window](#24h-window)
- [Download options](#download-options)

>     - [Using the Python API](/e-forecast-data/e2-e3-numerical-weather-forecasting-model?downloadoptions=pythonapi#downloadoptions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Using the Python API](/e-forecast-data/e2-e3-numerical-weather-forecasting-model?download-options=pythonapi#download-options)
```

| New Model Run (Initialization) | every 3 h | every 6 h |
| Output Data Format | GRIB edition 2 | GRIB edition 2 |

### Available parameters

### 🚧  **Temporary Notice Work in Progress**

> Users can find information about available parameters, including metadata about height, longitude and latitude, in the collections decribed above. To access the parameter overview click on the link for the desired model. A new browser window will open; then, navigate to the `Assets` section and click the download button.

Author: Yes, we do. Besides the available parameters we also share information on CLON,CLAT and HHL in the list. But we can still change the text.

> Users can find information about available parameters, including metadata about height, longitude and latitude, in the collections decribed above. To access the parameter overview click on the link for the desired model. A new browser window will open; then, navigate to the `Assets` section and click the download button.

Reviewer: Ah sorry in the text I understood that you can find this information in the parameters list.

### 24h window

The data provided in the two collections described in the [Models' specifications table](#models-specifications) is accessible for **24 hours**.

Data older than this is no longer available.

## Data Structure

### GRIB format

The data is provided in GRIB2 format, which is a binary format used internationally and defined by WMO.
More information about the data format can be found in the [Manual on Codes](https://library.wmo.int/records/item/35769-manual-on-codes-volume-i-3-international-codes) published by WMO.

> ⚠️ **WARNING**: Data located at the boundary of the spatial domain may be random.

### GRIB file structure

 Each GRIB2 file contains data for a single model collection, one reference time, one forecast lead time, and one variable — either as the deterministic control run or the full ensemble. The following diagram shows a general overview.

![StructureDiagram](./static/docs_img/ogd_data_structure.drawio.png) <br></br>

### Download options

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

<Tabs queryString="download-options">

>     <TabItem value="python-api-access" label="Python API Access">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <TabItem value="using-the-python-api" label="Using the Python API">
```

>     To obtain the ICON model data, we recommend using MeteoSwiss's [meteodata-lab](https://meteoswiss.github.io/meteodata-lab/) library - a convenient tool to simplify accessing and working with numerical weather model data.

Reviewer: We can leave the first part of the sentence, "to obtain data" is a bit too vague and we're already mentioning in the same sentence "accessing and working with nwp data" 
```suggestion
    We recommend using MeteoSwiss's [meteodata-lab](https://meteoswiss.github.io/meteodata-lab/) library - a convenient tool to simplify accessing and working with numerical weather model data.
```

>     The library includes downloading ICON-CH1/2-EPS GRIB2 data and loading it into [xarray DataArray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.html).

Reviewer: supports best suited than includes for the context of a library
```suggestion
    The library supports downloading ICON-CH1/2-EPS GRIB2 data and loading it into [xarray DataArray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.html).
```

    It is particularly ideal for users who want a clean and easy way to integrate forecast data into Python workflows.

    </TabItem>

>     <TabItem value="rest-api-access-http-post" label="REST API Access (HTTP POST)">

Reviewer: It sounds as if we would want access to the REST API but want to access the data using the REST API, sorry if I suggested something else before
```suggestion
    <TabItem value="using-the-rest-api-http-post" label="Using the REST API (HTTP POST)">
```

        - **generalVerticalLayer**: The `level` value corresponds to a full level. To obtain the height in meters above sea level, average the heights of the two surrounding half levels (above and below).
        - **Other types of level**: These are usually specified directly in meters and are self-explanatory.

    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="manual-download-via-stac-browser" label="Manual download via STAC Browser">
    If users prefer to use a web interface to browse and download individual forecast GRIB files,
    they can use the STAC Browser for [ICON-CH1-EPS](https://data.geo.admin.ch/browser/#/collections/ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch1?.language=en) and [ICON-CH2-EPS](https://data.geo.admin.ch/browser/#/collections/ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch2?.language=en).

    The screenshot below shows the download option in the STAC Browser for the `ALB_RAD` parameter. Files are downloaded directly through the browser interface and saved to the default download location.

    ![browser-ch1-download.png](./static/docs_img/browser-ch1-download.png)

>     Simply click on the provided download button and the browser will handle the rest.
>     The GRIB files are saved into your Downloads folder or the location where your browser stores downloaded files.
>     You can access them there once the download is completed.

Reviewer: I would remove this paragraph (see https://github.com/MeteoSwiss/opendata/pull/261#discussion_r2075771946)
```suggestion
```

More information about the data format can be found in the [Manual on Codes](https://library.wmo.int/records/item/35769-manual-on-codes-volume-i-3-international-codes) published by WMO.

> ⚠️ **WARNING**: Data located at the boundary of the spatial domain may be random.

#### Forecast data volume

The following tables summarize the volume of the different forecast files for **ICON-CH1-EPS** and **ICON-CH2-EPS**.

**ICON-CH1-EPS Data Volume**
| | Single-Level Files| Multi-Level Files|
|-----------|------------------|-----------------|
| Deterministic| 199.0 Bytes - 2.2 MiB| 19.7 - 177.4 MiB|
| Perturbed | 1.9 KiB - 22.4 MiB | 197.1 MiB - 1.7 GiB |

**ICON-CH2-EPS Data Volume**
| | Single-Level Files| Multi-Level Files|
|-----------|------------------|-----------------|
| Deterministic|  175.0 Bytes - 564.7 KiB| 4.9 MiB - 43.9 MiB|
| Perturbed | 3.4 KiB - 11 MiB | 97.5 MiB - 877.5 MiB |

### Download options

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

<Tabs queryString="download-options">
    <TabItem value="python-api-access" label="Python API Access">

>     One of the easiest ways to access the ICON model data is to use MeteoSwiss's [meteodata-lab](https://meteoswiss.github.io/meteodata-lab/) library - a convenient tool to simplify accessing and working with numerical weather model data.

Reviewer: I wouldn't claim it's the easiest way... :) it is if people are most familiar with python

Author: I was trying to advertise for the notebooks. How about fastes? @ninaburg

Author: To access the ICON model data, use...

>     The library includes downloading and optionally loading ICON-CH1/CH2-EPS data into formats like [xarray.DataArray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.html).

Author: How about: "The library includes downloading ICON-CH1/CH2-EPS data in GRIB2 format and accesssing the GRIB2 data via [xarray.DataArray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.html)." ?

>     Ideal for users who want a clean and easy way to integrate forecast data into Python workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It is particularly ideal for users who want a clean and easy way to integrate forecast data into Python workflows.
```

    </TabItem>

>     <TabItem value="rest-api-access-http-post" label="Rest API Access (HTTP POST)">

Reviewer: REST is an acronym (REpresentational State Transfer) and must be capitalized 
```suggestion
    <TabItem value="rest-api-access-http-post" label="REST API Access (HTTP POST)">
```

>     Users who prefer direct API access using tools like curl or custom code in any language, they can retrieve datasets directly via the [REST API](https://data.geo.admin.ch/api/stac/static/spec/v1/apitransactional.html#tag/Data/operation/getAsset).

Reviewer: would rather mention "issuing HTTP request" than "using curl". curl is a tool to use in the command line to perform the http request but it's one way to issue them that we show here, people could integrate the http request in other languages (python (as we do), javascript...)
```suggestion
    Users who prefer direct interaction with the REST API by issuing HTTP POST requests can retrieve datasets via the [API endpoint](https://data.geo.admin.ch/api/stac/static/spec/v1/apitransactional.html).
```

    ```
    2. Locate the `href` field under `assets` in `id: vertical_constants_icon-ch1-eps.grib2` and copy the pre-signed URL.
    3. Download the file with:
    ```
    wget -O <desired_filename> “<pre-signed URL>”
    ```
    4. Once the static GRIB file is downloaded, verify that the `uuidOfVGrid` (Universally Unique Identifier for the vertical grid) key in the data file matches the one in the HHL file.
    5. Retrieve the value for the `level` key and inspect the `typeOfLevel` key by listing the GRIB messages:
        - **generalVertical**: The value of `level` corresponds to a half level in the HHL file. For each level (i.e., each GRIB message), the variable `h` provides the height in meters above sea level for every grid point.
        - **generalVerticalLayer**: The `level` value corresponds to a full level. To obtain the height in meters above sea level, average the heights of the two surrounding half levels (above and below).
        - **Other types of level**: These are usually specified directly in meters and are self-explanatory.

    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="manual-download-via-stac-browser" label="Manual download via STAC Browser">

>     If users prefer to use a web interface to donwload available forecast GRIB files one by one or want to browse them,

Reviewer: typo and text reformulation
```suggestion
    If users prefer to use a web interface to browse and download individual forecast GRIB files,
```

>     they can use the STAC Browser of the model [ICON-CH1-EPS](https://data.geo.admin.ch/browser/#/collections/ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch1?.language=en) or     [ICON-CH2-EPS](https://data.geo.admin.ch/browser/#/collections/ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch2?.language=en).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    they can use the STAC Browser for the [ICON-CH1-EPS](https://data.geo.admin.ch/browser/#/collections/ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch1?.language=en) or     [ICON-CH2-EPS](https://data.geo.admin.ch/browser/#/collections/ch.meteoschweiz.ogd-forecasting-icon-ch2?.language=en) models.

```

Author: I think "models" should be singular..? @ninaburg

Author: for icon1 AND ICON2.

>     The Screenshot below shows the download button of the STAC catalog of the model ICON-CH1-EPS.

Reviewer: I don't think the last paragraph is necessary as we have a more technical audience, I don't think we need to indicate that they have to click on it
```suggestion
    The screenshot below shows the download option in the STAC Browser for the `ALB_RAD` parameter. Files are downloaded directly through the browser interface and saved to the default download location.
```

    ![browser-ch1-download.png](./static/docs_img/browser-ch1-download.png)

    Simply click on the provided download button and the browser will handle the rest.
    The GRIB files are saved into your Downloads folder or the location where your browser stores downloaded files.
    You can access them there once the download is completed.
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Working with the forecast data

### Exploring GRIB files in Python
Several Jupyter Notebooks explain how to download and work with forecast files in [xarray.DataArray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.DataArray.html) format.
To explore them, check out the GitHub repository [opendata-nwp-demos](https://github.com/MeteoSwiss/opendata-nwp-demos).

### Reading GRIB files using ecCodes

> Working with the raw GRIB files, you need a tool to decode the GRIB records. Each GRIB record holds the data for one parameter

Reviewer: "To work with" is smoother than "Working with"
```suggestion
To work with GRIB files, you need a tool to decode the GRIB records. Each GRIB record holds the data for one parameter
```

grib_dump -w key1=value1,key2=value2 filename.grib
```

## FAQ/Troubleshooting

<details>

> <summary> <b> "Why can't I find latitude or longitude?" </b> </summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<summary> <b> "Why can't I find the latitude or longitude coordinates?" </b> </summary>
```

Raw forecast GRIB files loaded via the REST API do not contain information about height, longitude and latitude.
To geolocate or interpret vertical levels, you must use the static vertical and horizontal grid parameter files provided in each collection.
For more information, read section [Accessing static grid information: Height, longitude and latitude](#accessing-static-grid-information-Height-longitude-and-latitude).
</details>

<details>

> <summary> <b> "Why does my download expire?" </b> </summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<summary> <b> "Why is my download empty or failing?" </b> </summary>
```

Author: Do you think the expire part is not useful?

What issue do you have in mind here? @ninaburg

Author: "Wat does HTTPError: 403 Client Error: Forbidden for url mean?"

Author: "Why is my HTTP Request response empty?"
"Why do I get HTTPError: 403, when downloading with the Python API?"

> The data provided in the two collections described in the [Model specifications table](#model-specifications) is accessible for only **24 hours**. After 24 hour the data expires.

Reviewer: sorry expiring was not the right title, it sounds as if the data one already downloaded is not anymore will disapear. I tried to reformulate avoiding "expire"
```suggestion
The data provided in the two collections described in the [Model specifications table](#model-specifications) is accessible for only **24 hours**. Data older than this is no longer available.

```

</details>

<details>

> <summary> <b> "How to interpret different types of levels?" </b> </summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<summary> <b> "How do I interprete the different types of vertical levels?" </b> </summary>
```

grib_dump -w key1=value1,key2=value2 filename.grib
```

## FAQ/Troubleshooting

<details>
<summary> <b> "Why can't I find the latitude or longitude coordinates?" </b> </summary>

Raw forecast GRIB files loaded via the REST API do not contain information about height, longitude and latitude.
To geolocate or interpret vertical levels, you must use the static vertical and horizontal grid parameter files provided in each collection.
For more information, read section [Accessing static grid information: Height, longitude and latitude](#accessing-static-grid-information-Height-longitude-and-latitude).
</details>

<details>
<summary> <b> "Why is my HTTP response empty?" </b> </summary>

> The data provided in the two collections described in the [Model specifications table](#models-specifications) is accessible for only **24 hours**. Data older than this is no longer available.

Reviewer: "may be why" it could be also another reason maybe an inexistent param would lead to the same response
```suggestion
The data provided in the two collections described in the [Model specifications table](#models-specifications) is accessible for only **24 hours**. Data older than this is no longer available, which may be why your HTTP response is empty."
```
